docs: Added go-ftw test (#104)
coreruleset/documentation: content/development/testing.md

Well, you managed to write your rule, but now want to see if if can be added to the CRS? This document should help you to test it using the same tooling the project uses for its tests.

> CRS uses [go-ftw](https://github.com/coreruleset/go-ftw) to run test cases. **go-ftw** is the successor of the previously used test runner [ftw](https://github.com/coreruleset/ftw). The CRS project no longer uses **ftw** but it us still useful for running tests of older CRS versions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CRS uses [go-ftw](https://github.com/coreruleset/go-ftw) to run test cases. **go-ftw** is the successor to the previously used test runner [ftw](https://github.com/coreruleset/ftw). The CRS project no longer uses **ftw** but it us still useful for running tests of older CRS versions.
```

## Environments

Before you start to run tests, you should set up your environment. You can use Docker to run a web server with CRS integration or use your existing environment.

### Setting up Docker containers

For testing, we use the [container images from our project](https://github.com/coreruleset/modsecurity-crs-docker). We "bind mount" the rules in the CRS Git repository to the web server container and then instruct **go-ftw** to send requests to it.

To test we need two containers: the WAF itself, and a backend, provided in this case by the http://httpbin.org project. The `docker-compose.yml` in the CRS Git repository is a ready-to-run configuration for testing, to be used with the `docker compose` command.

> -> The supported platform is modsecurity 2 with Apache

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-> The supported platform is ModSecurity 2 with Apache httpd
```

> Let's start the containers using:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's start the containers by executing the following command:
```

```bash
❯ docker compose -f tests/docker-compose.yml up -d modsec2-apache

Creating network "tests_default" with the default driver
Creating tests_backend_1 ... done
Creating modsec2-apache  ... done
❯ docker ps
CONTAINER ID   IMAGE                              COMMAND                  CREATED          STATUS         PORTS                               NAMES
785a6f6a3cb6   owasp/modsecurity-crs:3.3-apache   "/docker-entrypoint.…"   7 seconds ago    Up 3 seconds   0.0.0.0:80->80/tcp, :::80->80/tcp   modsec2-apache
bb8d5a7f256d   kennethreitz/httpbin               "gunicorn -b 0.0.0.0…"   10 seconds ago   Up 7 seconds   80/tcp                              tests_backend_1
```

Excellent, our containers are running, now we can start our tests.

> ### Using your own environment for testing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Using your own environment for testing {#use-own-env}
```

If you have your own environment set up, you can configure that for testing. Please [follow these instructions]({{< ref "install.md#installing-a-compatible-waf-engine" >}}) to install the WAF server locally.

-> The supported platform is ModSecurity 2 with Apache httpd. If you want to run the tests against nginx, you can do that too, but nginx uses libmodsecurity3, which is not fully compatible with Apache httpd + ModSecurity 2.

If you want to run the complete test suite of CRS 4.0 with **go-ftw**, you need to make some modifications to your setup. This is because the test cases for 4.0 contain some extra data for responses, letting us test the `RESPONSE-*` rules too. Without the following steps these tests will fail.

> To enable response handling for tests you will need the following additional pacakges: `python3-gunicorn`, `gunicorn` and `python3-httpbin`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To enable response handling for tests you will need the following additional packages: `python3-gunicorn`, `gunicorn` and `python3-httpbin`.
```

                proxy_http_version 1.1;
                proxy_buffering off;
                proxy_connect_timeout 60s;
                proxy_read_timeout 36000s;
                proxy_redirect off;

                proxy_pass_header Authorization;
        }
```

In both cases (Apache httpd, nginx) you have to change your `modsecurity.conf` settings. Open that file and find the directive `SecResponseBodyMimeType`. Modify the arguments:

```
SecResponseBodyMimeType text/plain text/html text/xml application/json
```

Note, that the default value does not have the MIME type `application/json`.

In your `crs-setup.conf` you need to add these extra rules (after the rule `900990`):

```
SecAction
    "id:900005,\
    phase:1,\
    nolog,\
    pass,\
    ctl:ruleEngine=DetectionOnly,\
    ctl:ruleRemoveById=910000,\
    setvar:tx.blocking_paranoia_level=4,\
    setvar:tx.crs_validate_utf8_encoding=1,\
    setvar:tx.arg_name_length=100,\
    setvar:tx.arg_length=400,\
    setvar:tx.max_file_size=64100,\
    setvar:tx.combined_file_sizes=65535"

SecRule REQUEST_HEADERS:X-CRS-Test "@rx ^.*$" \
    "id:999999,\
    phase:1,\
    pass,\
    t:none,\
    log,\
    msg:'%{MATCHED_VAR}'"
```

> Now, after the restarting the web server all request will be sent to `httpbin`. Let's start testing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, after restarting the web server all request will be sent to `httpbin`. Let's start testing.
```

## Go-ftw

Tests are performed using [go-ftw](https://github.com/coreruleset/go-ftw). We run our test suite automatically using **go-ftw** as part of a [GitHub workflow](https://github.com/coreruleset/coreruleset/blob/{{< param crs_dev_branch >}}/.github/workflows/test.yml). You can easily reproduce that locally, on your workstation.

For that you will need:

- the CRS Git repository
- Docker (modern versions of docker already include the `compose` command, if you are running an older version you also need to have `docker-compose` installed)
  OR

>   your own environment (see above installation steps)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  [your own environment]({{< relref #use-own-env >}})

Author: I didn't know it is possible, thanks :)

- your rules and tests!

You can download pre-compiled binaries of **go-ftw** or build from source (requires you to have a **Go** environment). The pre-compiled binaries are available [on GitHub](https://github.com/coreruleset/go-ftw/releases). The binaries are ready to run and do not require installation.

You can also install pre-compiled binaries by using `go install`, if you have a **Go** environment:

```bash
$ go install github.com/coreruleset/go-ftw@latest
```

This will install the binary into your `$HOME/go/bin` directory. To compile **go-ftw** from source, run the following commands:

```bash
$ git clone https://github.com/coreruleset/go-ftw.git
$ cd go-ftw
$ go build
```

This will build the binary in the **go-ftw** repository.

> Now create a configuration file. Because Apache httpd and nginx use different log file paths, and, perhaps, different ports, you may want to create two different configuration files for **go-ftw**. For details please read the [original](https://github.com/coreruleset/go-ftw#yaml-config-file) documentation of **fo-ftw**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now create a configuration file. Because Apache httpd and nginx use different log file paths, and, perhaps, different ports, you may want to create two different configuration files for **go-ftw**. For details please read [go-ftw's documentation](https://github.com/coreruleset/go-ftw#yaml-config-file).
```

Example for nginx:

```bash
$ cat .ftw.nginx.yaml
logfile: /var/log/nginx/error.log
logmarkerheadername: X-CRS-TEST
testoverride:
  input:
    dest_addr: "127.0.0.1"
    port: 8080
```

Example for Apache httpd:

```bash
$ cat .ftw.apache.yaml
logfile: /var/log/apache2/error.log
logmarkerheadername: X-CRS-TEST
testoverride:
  input:
    dest_addr: "127.0.0.1"
    port: 80
```

> Please verify that these settings are correct for your setup, specifically the `port` values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Please verify that these settings are correct for your setup, especially the `port` values.
```

### Running the test suite

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

To test we need two containers: the WAF itself, and a backend, provided in this case by the http://httpbin.org project. The `docker-compose.yml` in the CRS Git repository is a ready-to-run configuration for testing, to be used with the `docker compose` command.

-> The supported platform is modsecurity 2 with Apache

Let's start the containers using:
```bash
❯ docker compose -f tests/docker-compose.yml up -d modsec2-apache

Creating network "tests_default" with the default driver
Creating tests_backend_1 ... done
Creating modsec2-apache  ... done
❯ docker ps
CONTAINER ID   IMAGE                              COMMAND                  CREATED          STATUS         PORTS                               NAMES
785a6f6a3cb6   owasp/modsecurity-crs:3.3-apache   "/docker-entrypoint.…"   7 seconds ago    Up 3 seconds   0.0.0.0:80->80/tcp, :::80->80/tcp   modsec2-apache
bb8d5a7f256d   kennethreitz/httpbin               "gunicorn -b 0.0.0.0…"   10 seconds ago   Up 7 seconds   80/tcp                              tests_backend_1
```

Excellent, our containers are running, now we can start our tests.

### Using your own environment for testing

> If you have your own environment set up, you can configure that for testing. If you don't yet have an environment but have a Debian or Ubuntu server, you can configure [Digitalwave's](https://modsecurity.digitalwave.hu) package repository for supported distributions. There you can follow the instructions on how to configure your WAF.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you have your own environment set up, you can configure that for testing. Please [follow these instructions]({{< ref "install.md#installing-a-compatible-waf-engine" >}}) to install the WAF server locally.
```

Reviewer 2: I don't think it makes sense to repeat that here, let's point it to the page we have it documented...

You can also install pre-compiled binaries by using `go install`, if you have a **Go** environment:

```bash
$ go install github.com/coreruleset/go-ftw@latest
```

This will install the binary into your `$HOME/go/bin` directory. To compile **go-ftw** from source, run the following commands:

```bash
$ git clone https://github.com/coreruleset/go-ftw.git
$ cd go-ftw
$ go build .
```

This will build the binary in the **go-ftw** repository.

Now create a configuration file. Because Apache httpd and nginx use different log file paths, and, perhaps, different ports, you may want to create two different configuration files for **go-ftw**.

Example for nginx:

```bash
$ cat .ftw.nginx.yaml
logfile: /var/log/nginx/error.log
logmarkerheadername: X-CRS-TEST
testoverride:
  input:
    dest_addr: "127.0.0.1"
    port: 8080
mode: "default"
```

Example for Apache httpd:

```bash
$ cat .ftw.apache.yaml
logfile: /var/log/apache2/error.log
logmarkerheadername: X-CRS-TEST
testoverride:
  input:
    dest_addr: "127.0.0.1"
    port: 80
mode: "default"
```

> Please verify that these settings are correct for your setup, specifically the `port` values.

Reviewer 2: Why repeating the default config values? Mode is `"default"` by... default. Same with the `logmarkerheadername`.

Author: Because I see that in the official [go-ftw documentation](https://github.com/coreruleset/go-ftw#yaml-config-file)

Reviewer 2: Ok. Then we might want to point people to that documentation instead? I think that if we repeat things all over the place, they will be out of sync sooner than later...

Author: I agree we might show the original documentation, but **beside** this and not **instead**. I would like to see the whole preparation process in one page. What do you think?

Author: But what would be the solution?
* put the original documentation **before** the examples
* remove `mode: "default"` settings
* both of them

Reviewer 2: I would:
- link the upstream doc before the examples
- remove everything from the config except the bare minimal for tests to work

Author: Done. Could you check it?

If you need to see more verbose output (e.g., to look at the requests and responses sent and received by **go-ftw**) you can use the `--debug` or `--trace` options:

```bash
$ ./go-ftw run --config .ftw.apache.yaml -d ../coreruleset/tests/regression/tests/ -i "955100-1$" --trace
```

```bash
$ ./go-ftw run --config .ftw.apache.yaml -d ../coreruleset/tests/regression/tests/ -i "955100-1$" --debug
```

Please note again that `libmodsecurity3` is **not fully compatible** with ModSecurity 2, some tests can fail. If you want to ignore them, you can put the tests into a list in your config:

```
testoverride:
  input:
    dest_addr: "127.0.0.1"
    port: 8080
  ignore:
    # text comes from our friends at https://github.com/digitalwave/ftwrunner
    '941190-3$': 'known MSC bug - PR #2023 (Cookie without value)'
    '941330-1$': 'know MSC bug - #2148 (double escape)'
    ...
```

For more information and examples, please check the [go-ftw documentation](https://github.com/coreruleset/go-ftw#example-usage).

**Also please don't forget to roll back the modifications from this guide to your WAF configuration after you're done testing!**

## Ftw

> [ftw](https://github.com/coreruleset/ftw) is our legacy test runner, retired with CRS 4.0. We used to automatically run our test suite using **ftw** as part of a [GitHub workflow](https://github.com/coreruleset/coreruleset/blob/v3.3/dev/.github/workflows/test.yml). You can easily reproduce that locally, on your workstation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[ftw](https://github.com/coreruleset/ftw) is our legacy test runner, and is **deprecated** and no longer used for tests after CRS v3.2. Refer to this [GitHub workflow](https://github.com/coreruleset/coreruleset/blob/v3.3/dev/.github/workflows/test.yml) if you need to use the old **ftw** Python version. You can easily reproduce that locally, on your workstation.
```

Author: We need to change the link too, it refers to v3.3 workflow (where we use go-ftw)

Author: Done

Well, you managed to write your rule, but now want to see if if can be added to the CRS? This document should help you to test it using the same tooling the project uses for its tests.

CRS has two kind of types of test tools. Since the version 4.0 we use [go-ftw](https://github.com/coreruleset/go-ftw), this is the new method. The "old" one is the "classic" [ftw](https://github.com/coreruleset/ftw). This is a deprecated method, but it us useful for older version of CRS.

## Environments

Before you start to run tests, you should set up your environment. You can use a Docker image, or if you have an own instance, you can use that one.

### Setting up Docker containers

For testing, we use the [docker images from our project](https://github.com/coreruleset/modsecurity-crs-docker). That way we can easily use the base containers. But, we "bind mount" the rules in the git repository. So that will allow you to easily test any rules you want inside the containers.

To test we need two containers: the WAF itself, and a backend provided by the http://httpbin.org project. That is we we use `docker-compose`, so we can run and connect them easily.

> -> The supported platform is modsecurity 2 with Apache

Reviewer 2: Let's go back to this one once we have the tests working for all other engines. I agree we must change it.

[2023-12-14 15:59:53 +0100] [4012] [INFO] Listening at: http://127.0.0.1:8000 (4012)
[2023-12-14 15:59:53 +0100] [4012] [INFO] Using worker: sync
[2023-12-14 15:59:53 +0100] [4013] [INFO] Booting worker with pid: 4013
```

As you can see the HTTP server listens on 127.0.0.1:8000, you can check it:

```bash
$ curl -X POST -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d '{"foo":"bar"}' "http://localhost:8000/anything"
{
  "args": {},
  "data": "{\"foo\":\"bar\"}",
  "files": {},
  "form": {},
  "headers": {
    "Accept": "*/*",
    "Content-Length": "13",
    "Content-Type": "application/json",
    "Host": "localhost:8000",
    "User-Agent": "curl/8.4.0"
  },
  "json": {
    "foo": "bar"
  },
  "method": "POST",
  "origin": "127.0.0.1",
  "url": "http://localhost:8000/anything"
}
```

As you can see, the response's `data` field contains your request data, this is necessary for testing response rules.

### Modify webserver's config

For the response's test you need to set up your webserver as a proxy, which sends the requests to `httpbin`. Here are the examples.

**Before you start to change your configurations, please make a backup!**

#### Apache

> Put this snippet into your httpd's default config:

Reviewer 2: The problem is that it will depend on the server being used. RH derivatives will use `/etc/httpd`, and debian will use `/etc/apache2`.

> Put this snippet into your httpd's default config:

Author: Done

```
SecAction
    "id:900005,\
    phase:1,\
    nolog,\
    pass,\
    ctl:ruleEngine=DetectionOnly,\
    ctl:ruleRemoveById=910000,\
    setvar:tx.blocking_paranoia_level=4,\
    setvar:tx.crs_validate_utf8_encoding=1,\
    setvar:tx.arg_name_length=100,\
    setvar:tx.arg_length=400,\
    setvar:tx.max_file_size=64100,\
    setvar:tx.combined_file_sizes=65535"

SecRule REQUEST_HEADERS:X-CRS-Test "@rx ^.*$" \
    "id:999999,\
    phase:1,\
    pass,\
    t:none,\
    log,\
    msg:'%{MATCHED_VAR}'"
```

Now after the restart all request will send to `httpbin`. Let's start testing.

## Go-ftw

Tests are performed using a golang tool called [go-ftw](https://github.com/coreruleset/go-ftw). We run them using a [GitHub actions pipeline](https://github.com/coreruleset/coreruleset/blob/{{< param crs_dev_branch >}}/.github/workflows/test.yml). You can easily reproduce that locally, in your workstation.

For that you will need:

- the coreruleset git repository
- docker and docker-compose (modern versions of docker already include compose functionality)
  OR
  an own instance (see above installation steps)
- golang compiler
- your rules and tests!

> You can download the pre-compiled version or build your own instance. Precompiled versions are [here](https://github.com/coreruleset/go-ftw/releases). Just download it and you can use that.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can download pre-compiled binaries of **go-ftw** or build from source (requires you to have a **Go** environment). The pre-compiled binaries are available [on GitHub](https://github.com/coreruleset/go-ftw/releases). The binaries are ready to run and do not require installation.
```

> If you want to build one, you can type:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also install pre-compiled binaries by using `go install`, if you have a **Go** environment:
```

```bash
$ go install github.com/coreruleset/go-ftw@latest
```

> This will build the binary into your `$HOME/go/bin` directory. Other option:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This will install the binary into your `$HOME/go/bin` directory. To compile **go-ftw** from source, run the following commands:
```

```bash
$ git clone https://github.com/coreruleset/go-ftw.git
$ cd go-ftw
$ go build .
```

> This will build the binary into your source directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This will build the binary in the **go-ftw** repository.
```

> Now create a configuration file. Because the two webservers uses different log files, and - perhaps - different ports, you can create two different config files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now create a configuration file. Because Apache httpd and nginx use different log file paths, and, perhaps, different ports, you may want to create two different configuration files for **go-ftw**.
```

> You can use this for Nginx:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Example for nginx:
```

```bash
$ cat .ftw.nginx.yaml
logfile: /var/log/nginx/error.log
logmarkerheadername: X-CRS-TEST
testoverride:
  input:
    dest_addr: "127.0.0.1"
    port: 8080
mode: "default"
```

> and this one for Apache:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Example for Apache httpd:
```

```bash
$ cat .ftw.apache.yaml
logfile: /var/log/apache2/error.log
logmarkerheadername: X-CRS-TEST
testoverride:
  input:
    dest_addr: "127.0.0.1"
    port: 80
mode: "default"
```

> Please check your `port` value and other settings, those can be different.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Please verify that these settings are correct for your setup, specifically the `port` values.
```

### Running the test suite

> The test suite will be run by the tool `go-ftw`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Here is how you can run tests:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Execute the following command to run the CRS test suite with **go-ftw** against Apache httpd:
```

```bash
$ ./go-ftw run --config .ftw.apache.yaml -d ../coreruleset/tests/regression/tests/
🛠️  Starting tests!
🚀 Running go-ftw!
👉 executing tests in file 911100.yaml
	running 911100-1: ✔ passed in 239.699575ms (RTT 126.721984ms)
	running 911100-2: ✔ passed in 63.339213ms (RTT 69.998361ms)
	running 911100-3: ✔ passed in 64.87875ms (RTT 71.368241ms)
	running 911100-4: ✔ passed in 77.823772ms (RTT 81.059904ms)
	running 911100-5: ✔ passed in 64.451749ms (RTT 70.403898ms)
	running 911100-6: ✔ passed in 67.774327ms (RTT 73.803885ms)
	running 911100-7: ✔ passed in 65.528094ms (RTT 72.64316ms)
	running 911100-8: ✔ passed in 66.129563ms (RTT 73.198992ms)
👉 executing tests in file 913100.yaml
	running 913100-1: ✔ passed in 71.242549ms (RTT 76.803619ms)
	running 913100-2: ✔ passed in 69.999667ms (RTT 76.617714ms)
	running 913100-3: ✔ passed in 70.200211ms (RTT 76.92281ms)
	running 913100-4: ✔ passed in 65.856005ms (RTT 73.328341ms)
	running 913100-5: ✔ passed in 66.986859ms (RTT 73.494356ms)
  ...
```

> or you can use your Nginx configuration file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To run the test suite against nginx, execute the following:
```

```bash
$ ./go-ftw run --config .ftw.nginx.yaml -d ../coreruleset/tests/regression/tests/
🛠️  Starting tests!
🚀 Running go-ftw!
👉 executing tests in file 911100.yaml
	running 911100-1: ✔ passed in 851.460335ms (RTT 292.802335ms)
	running 911100-2: ✔ passed in 53.748811ms (RTT 66.798867ms)
	running 911100-3: ✔ passed in 49.237535ms (RTT 67.964411ms)
	running 911100-4: ✔ passed in 194.935023ms (RTT 202.414171ms)
	running 911100-5: ✔ passed in 52.905305ms (RTT 66.254034ms)
	running 911100-6: ✔ passed in 52.597784ms (RTT 68.58854ms)
	running 911100-7: ✔ passed in 51.996881ms (RTT 67.496534ms)
	running 911100-8: ✔ passed in 50.804143ms (RTT 67.589557ms)
👉 executing tests in file 913100.yaml
	running 913100-1: ✔ passed in 276.383507ms (RTT 85.436758ms)
	running 913100-2: ✔ passed in 86.682684ms (RTT 69.89541ms)
  ...
```

> If you want to run only one test, or a group of tests, you can include only that one(s) with option `-i`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to run only one test, or a group of tests, you can specify that using the "include" option `-i` (or `--include`). This option takes a regular expression:
```

```bash
$ ./go-ftw run --config .ftw.apache.yaml -d ../coreruleset/tests/regression/tests/ -i "955100-1$"
```

> In this case only the test case `955100-1` test will run.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the above case only the test case `955100-1` will be run.
```

> If you want to see how looks like the request, response and log lines, you can pass the option `--trace`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you need to see more verbose output (e.g., to look at the requests and responses sent and received by **go-ftw**) you can use the `--debug` or `--trace` options:
```

```bash
$ ./go-ftw run --config .ftw.apache.yaml -d ../coreruleset/tests/regression/tests/ -i "955100-1$" --trace
```

> or `--debug`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

```bash
$ ./go-ftw run --config .ftw.apache.yaml -d ../coreruleset/tests/regression/tests/ -i "955100-1$" --debug
```

> Please note again that `libmodsecurity3` is **not fully compatible** with `mod_security2`, some tests can be failed. If you want to ignore them, you can put the tests onto a list in your config:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Please note again that `libmodsecurity3` is **not fully compatible** with ModSecurity 2, some tests can fail. If you want to ignore them, you can put the tests into a list in your config:
```

```
testoverride:
  input:
    dest_addr: "127.0.0.1"
    port: 8080
  ignore:
    # text comes from our friends at https://github.com/digitalwave/ftwrunner
    '941190-3$': 'known MSC bug - PR #2023 (Cookie without value)'
    '941330-1$': 'know MSC bug - #2148 (double escape)'
    ...
```

> For more information and examples, please check the [go-ftw](https://github.com/coreruleset/go-ftw#example-usage)'s documentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information and examples, please check the [go-ftw documentation](https://github.com/coreruleset/go-ftw#example-usage).
```

> **Also please don't forget to rollback these modifications in your WAF config after you finished the tests!**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Also please don't forget to roll back the modifications from this guide to your WAF configuration after you're done testing!**
```

## Ftw

> In this case tests are performed using a Python tool called [ftw](https://github.com/coreruleset/ftw). We run them using the older versions of our [GitHub actions pipeline](https://github.com/coreruleset/coreruleset/blob/v3.3/dev/.github/workflows/test.yml). You can easily reproduce that locally, in your workstation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[ftw](https://github.com/coreruleset/ftw) is our legacy test runner, retired with CRS 4.0. We used to automatically run our test suite using **ftw** as part of a [GitHub workflow](https://github.com/coreruleset/coreruleset/blob/v3.3/dev/.github/workflows/test.yml). You can easily reproduce that locally, on your workstation.
```

Author: Seems applied too.
